[MUSIC]
>> Rachel Nabors: Causal Effects.
Now, causal animation is great for
indicating when something has
caused something else to happen.
Consider loaders, spinners, those
are great examples of causal effects.
They indicate when the server has gotten
up enough information to the page for
it to be caused to load properly.
Hover effects are also pretty familiar.
As such, we have all at one point or
another made a hover effect,
I'm pretty sure.
Here, we've got this button.
When we hover over the button,
notice it depresses and changes colors.
That's pretty familiar.
All that they indicate, in this case,
all that this little animation,
this transition is indicating is that
you are the cause of this thing.
You are causing this button to activate.
Here's a slightly less familiar one.
This is an interesting little
accessibility feature.
So notice that when you hover over
the tab, it causes the menu to move up or
down the direction that it's gonna go and
if you click on it.
This gives the user a little
indication that, hi,
you're interacting with this thing.
If you do something to it,
it's gonna change things.
So let's do that again.
Notice, hover, it bounces down a little.
Click, it actually pulls down.
Hover again, it slides up a little.
You click it and it pulls up.
That's a nice little thing to do for
users, if you have time and
energy to invest in thinking
about their well-being.
It lets their brains have a little prep
the time to realize that if I do this,
it's going to change, and what direction
I can anticipate the change to come from.
Now something from not me.
Notice that big peacock.
I'm gonna talk about that peacock next.
Now notice hovering over
the buttons causes different
things to slide in and out.
Indicates that you
are the cause of these changes.
When you hit Start, look,
stateful transition.
And here, when you're hovering over
the different, like which one's the boy or
which one's the girl?
This is a very strong indicator that
whichever one of these you click
is going to be your selection.
And look, boom, we got some
supplemental animation on the screen.
Now imagine how this would've been
in the era before animations,
like back in the 90s.
This would've just been a series of
forms with radio buttons and a click.
And then the page would wipe and
show you whether you were right or not.
And then you'd move on to the next.
And I guess that would be fun, but
honestly this is so much nicer.
Really fond of the Cornell Lab and
their work.
So lastly we have Decorative Animations.
Decorative Animations are embellishment.
They don't actually increase
the information density on the page.
This is important to think about.
All the animations I've shown you so far
have told you something about the content.
They've shown you what
direction it's going in.
They've shown you that you were
going to cause something to happen.
They've brought to light other information
that supplements the information
that's there.
It's all very information based,
we're adding back feelings of physics.
We're improving the information
density on the page.
But decorative animations, they don't
actually contribute a whole lot.
You can spot them because if you
ask the person who provides them,
maybe this person is you.
If you ask yourself,
why is this animation doing this thing?
If you can't verbalize a reason for why,
there's a good chance that it
is a decorative animation,
might not be worth the development
hours or the battery life to display.
So keep that in mind.
So often animation, I should mention,
will be more than one of these.
You can have a stateful transition
that is also decorative or
a supplemental animation that is
delightful and pretty to look at.
But sometimes if that's all it's doing,
if all it is is decoration,
it's not worth doing.
So here's my menu slowed down for detail.
You can see that I animated the in-between
states between more and nix this.
I didn't have to do this.
I could've just changed it from one to the
other or faded it from one into the other.
I didn't have to animate that.
It's not actually making it more useful
to the person to see that change.
But at the same time,
I had the extra hours and
I thought it was a nice detail to add and
it added a bit of polish to the interface.
>> Rachel Nabors: Now here's an example
of a decorative animation used for
a good reason.
Who remembers this?
Probably the first time you ever
saw SVG animated in this way.
When it came out it caused quite the stir.
I was fortunate enough to meet
the developers behind this,
and I can tell you that they stumbled
across this effect by accident.
So what happened was around the time
that the Xbox One was coming out,
all the different venues,
Polygon included, this is from Polygon.
They were getting these consoles and
they were getting pictures and
they were getting specs, and
they were running their reviews.
So every console review site out there
was posting pictures of the Xbox One and
then a long form article about
what was great, what was awesome,
what wasn't so great, etc.
How was Polygon gonna stand out and make
an article that people would want to share
more than all those other articles showing
the exact same pictures of the exact same
device, which looks the same everywhere?
How were they gonna stand out?
Well, I guess they could take
really nice photos of it.
Or maybe they could do a video
of someone playing with it, but
it's a console, it sits there.
So what could they do to add interest
to this thing that everyone else has?
They went with its specs chart.
They took that diagram of it and
they animated it.
And no one else had done this at
this time, so this was very new and
very different.
And yes, it's decorative but
they used this to showcase an otherwise
boring piece of information.
So keep in mind, sometimes doing
things for a decorative reason.
If you can verbalize why you should be
doing that, it still can be justified.
In this case, why would you do
this with this illustration?
Because it's a centerpiece.
Because it makes it stand apart from every
other image like it on the Internet.
Because it's doing something different
enough that it gives us an edge over our
competition.
A lot of people use this effect now
in places where it doesn't matter.
In places like I've seen itty
bitty icons used to separate
segments of a page on
an interactive agency site.
Nobody's going to be looking
that closely at them.
They're probably not even
going to notice the change.
Why are they done?
So that the agency can be like,
we know how to do that Polygon effect.
That would not be cool in a banking site.
That would not be cool in an app
you expect people to use every day.
That is just too decorative
to be worth doing.
But perhaps the agency was
able to justify it by saying,
we have to use this effect so
people know we can do the Polygon effect.